docs: add DR on the technical direction of decentralized identity for the EDC (#96)
eclipse-edc/docs: developer/decision-records/2023-09-06-identity-trust/README.md

including the `Identity Hub.`

## Rationale

Identity and trust are the cornerstones of a dataspace. Currently, the EDC has production-quality support for the
exchange of identity and claims information using
the [OAuth 2 Client Credentials Grant](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4). For many use cases,
relying on a centralized OAuth 2 Authorization Server is sufficient. However, there are a class of uses-cases which
require a decentralized approach to exchanging identity and claims data. For example, operational continuity
requirements may determine that a centralized Authentication Server poses too great a risk of service disruption. Or,
privacy rules may dictate that claims verification must be done without requiring both the verifying and verified party
being
known to a third-party identity provider.

The decentralized identity and trust system will enable dataspace participants to securely communicate and validate
credentials using
the [Dataspace Protocol Specifications](https://github.com/International-Data-Spaces-Association/ids-specification) (
DSP) in a way that preserves privacy and limits the possibility of network disruption.

## Approach

> The EDC identity and trust system will define a set of message interactions (termed "protocols") for the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The EDC identity and trust system will implement a set of message interactions (termed "protocols") for the following:
```

- **Self-Issued Identity Tokens**: Obtaining and cryptographically validating self-issued tokens that contain identity
  claims
- **Verifiable Credential Presentation**: Communicating Verifiable Credentials (VC), Verifiable Presentations (VP), and
  the cryptographic material needed to validate them
- **Verifiable Credential Issuance**: Issuing and renewing Verifiable Credentials and providing a mechanism for
  communicating credential revocation

> For convenience (and because not all stakeholders are EDC committers), the protocol specifications will be temporarily

Reviewer: Replace lines 38-41
```suggestion
### Overview of Protocol Specifications

The protocol specifications will be temporarily maintained in the [Eclipse Tractus-X SSI repository](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-docu), and are going to be transferred to the Eclipse Dataspace Working Group as
described [here](#protocol-specifications-and-the-eclipse-dataspace-working-group).
```

> For convenience (and because not all stakeholders are EDC committers), the protocol specifications will be temporarily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Overview of Protocol Specifications
The protocol specifications will be temporarily
```

Author: The way I read this change is it is changing the title of the section to be an overview, which it's not. I'm fine to strike the line "For convenience" but not to change the section title.

Reviewer: If you don't want to include this section title, you can revert the previous commits as they changed the heading level based on this...

Author: Reworded as per comment below.

> maintained in the [Eclipse Tractus-X SSI repository](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-docu). These specifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> maintained in the [Eclipse Tractus-X SSI repository](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-docu). These specifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
maintained in the [Eclipse Tractus-X SSI repository](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-docu) and
```

Author: I would propose rewording this and the above comment as follows, but not insert the section title:

"The protocol specifications are temporarily
maintained in the [Eclipse Tractus-X SSI repository](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-docu) but will be transferred to the Eclipse Dataspace Working Group as described [here](#protocol-specifications-and-the-eclipse-dataspace-working-group)."

> will be transferred to the Eclipse Dataspace Working Group as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> will be transferred to the Eclipse Dataspace Working Group as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are going to be transferred to the Eclipse Dataspace Working Group as
```

Author: The usage of "will" is better (more formal) English.

> described [here](#protocol-specifications-and-the-eclipse-dataspace-working-group).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Self-Issued Identity Tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Self-Issued Identity Tokens
```

The shape of self-issued identity tokens and protocol for obtaining them will be based on
the [Self-Issued OpenID Provider v2 specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-self-issued-v2-1_0.html#section-1.1) (
SIOPv2).

> ### Verifiable Credential Presentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Verifiable Credential Presentation
```

Data providers will often require a set of Verifiable Presentations (i.e. the presentation of a Verifiable Credential)
to access their assets. In addition, trust anchors such as Credential Issuers need a way to deliver Verifiable
Credentials to a holder.

The Verifiable Presentation protocol will define a set of operations for reading and writing Verifiable Credentials
using the W3C [Verifiable Credentials Data Model v1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/). The protocol will also
make use of
the [DIF Presentation Exchange specification](https://identity.foundation/presentation-exchange/spec/v2.0.0/).

Note that
the [OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.html#section-6.1)
was considered, but determined not to be sufficient, due to its focus on end-user as opposed to service-to-service
interactions. [DidComm Messaging](https://identity.foundation/didcomm-messaging/spec/) was also investigated as a
potential starting point but not selected due to unneeded complexity and lack of widespread adoption.

> ### Verifiable Credential Issuance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Verifiable Credential Issuance
```

Dataspaces will require an interoperable way for participant agent systems to request credential issuance, renew
credentials, and check for credential revocation. The Verifiable Credential Issuance will define a RESTful API over
HTTPS that uses the [W3C Decentralized Identifiers specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/) and
the [W3C Status List specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-status-list/).

Note that
the [OpenID for Verifiable Credential Issuance specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html#name-introduction)
was considered, but determined not to be sufficient, due to its focus on end-user interactions and lack of support for
long-running issuance processes that may involve human interaction.

> ### Protocol Specifications and The Eclipse Dataspace Working Group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Protocol Specifications and The Eclipse Dataspace Working Group
```

The protocol specifications (i.e. documents that define the message exchanges) for the Identity and Trust System will be
transferred to the [Eclipse Dataspace Working Group](https://www.eclipse.org/org/workinggroups/dataspace-charter.php)
for standardization. The EDC will track changes to the protocol specifications as they undergo standardization.

> ## Impact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adoption in EDC
```

Author: This section should be impact as that is what it is describing

> ## Impact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Impact
```

Author: Impact is a top-level section. Let's try and keep the DR structure as it is unless there is something incorrect about it.

The decentralized Identity and Trust System will have negligible architectural impact, as this work will be an extension
of existing EDC services. The most notable impact will be on the wire protocol used by the `Identity Hub.`

> ### Identity Hub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Identity Hub
```

The `Identity Hub` is currently based on an early version of
the [Decentralized Web Nodes specification](https://identity.foundation/decentralized-web-node/spec/) (DWN).
The `Identity Hub` lacks several important features including VC revocation, key rotation, and permission-based access.
Although the DWN standard specifies a permission-based access method, it is not compatible with OAuth 2 and SIOPv2.
Moreover, the goal of the DWN specification is to define a generic credential storage and message relay system. As such,
it does not address key topics including credential metadata exchange. The DWN specification will therefore be replaced
by the protocol specifications mentioned above, which will be aligned with standards including SIOPv2, DIF Presentation
Exchange, and W3C DID. Note that this will have no end-user impact as only the `Identity Hub` wire protocol will be
changed.

> ### Issuance Service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Issuance Service
```
